Evaluation tool for UCB A3d models (with homogenized crust)
===========================================================

Version 0.4 (2015/10/19) for SEMUCB-WM1

Introduction
------------

This code currently supports evaluation of the model:
  1) at a user-specified radius and (lon, lat) tuple;
  2) at a user-specified radius and list of (lon, lat) tuples; or
  2) on a regular lat-lon grid with user-specified spacing and radius.
In either case, the code exports both the relative Voigt-average shear velocity
and Xi (= Vsh ** 2 / Vsv ** 2) perturbations (relative to the reference 1D
model data/model.ref), as well as the associated absolute Vsv and Vsh values.

Please report bugs to Scott French (sfrench@seismo.berkeley.edu).


Compilation
-----------

Please adjust the Makefile (in this directory) to reflect your preferred C
compiler (default is gcc). The resulting executable will be placed in this
directory and must be run from here as well.


Caveats about A3d models
------------------------

Although the A3d model format uses a spline basis to express perturbations
relative to a "reference" 1D model (data/model.ref), it is important to note
that the latter is not designed to be a "good" 1D reference model from the
standpoint of fitting normal mode eigenfrequencies or other spherically
averaged data (unlike REF or PREM, for example). It is simply a convenience in
terms of parameterization.

To put this another way, although this code is capable of computing model
values in terms of percent perturbation relative to the global 1D reference
model, it is important to note that the latter represents the spherically
averaged part of the model at *most* depths. Above ~ 60 km depth, the reference
is not truly spherically averaged, as the average omits regions within the
homogenized crustal model. This is one of the reasons why the reference model
is not truly a spherically symmetric reference earth model (and is not intended
to be).


Example usage
-------------

The output format used by this tool is:

    <radius> <lon> <lat> <dlnVs (%)> <dlnXi (%)> <Vsv> <Vsh>

which is written to the file specified with the -o command like option (or to
model-samples.out if no argument is supplied).

Radius (km) to evaluate the model is set using the -r option. If you would like
to sample the model at multiple radii (note: all samples will be written to the
same file), simply specify -r multiple times.

For example, from this directory:

    > ./a3d_dist.x -r 6300 -l -114.6,62.6 -o out.dat

will write the above values to the file out.dat evaluated at a radius of 6300km
and at 114.6W 62.6N, while:

    > ./a3d_dist.x -r 6300 -d 2 -o out.dat

will instead write these values evaluated on a global 2 x 2 degree regular grid
of points. Finally

    > ./a3d_dist.x -r 6300 -i in.dat -o out.dat

will write these values evaluated at a list of lon, lat points in in.dat (one
per line) to out.dat. The input file is expected to have a simple two-column
format:

    <lon 1> <lat 1>
    <lon 2> <lat 2>
    ...
    <lon N> <lat N>

Note: nan values indicate evalution within the smooth crustal layer (which are
not interpretable). See French et al. (2013) and French and Romanowicz (2014)
for details of the crustal model.


Plotting
--------

An example plotting script, written in the Python programming language, is also
included in the plotting/ subdirectory. The script depends on the open-source
numpy and matplotlib libraries, as well as the Basemap toolkit (a GMT-like
library for use with matplotlib). The script may be used to plot model grids
exported on a 1 x 1 degree regular grid (i.e. with the argument -d 1).


References
----------

* Scott French, Barbara Romanowicz, "Whole-mantle radially anisotropic shear
  velocity structure from spectral-element waveform tomography", Geophysical
  Journal International, 2014, 199, doi: 10.1093/gji/ggu334
* Scott French, Vedran Lekic, Barbara Romanowicz, "Waveform Tomography Reveals
  Channeled Flow at the Base of the Oceanic Asthenosphere", Science, 2013,
  342:227, doi: 10.1126/science.1241514
